collections/library/hello-dart-en-next.md, before:

---
layout: article
title: "Hello Dart - Next Steps"
date: 2015-04-18 00:00
slug: hello-dart/next
github: https://github.com/marcojakob/code.makery.ch/edit/master/collections/library/hello-dart-en-next.md
description: "How can you learn even more about web programming after you've completed the Hello Dart tutorial."
image: /assets/library/hello-dart/hello-dart.png
published: true
prettify: false
comments: true
sidebars:
- header: Articles in this Series
  body:
  - text: "Introduction"
    link: /library/hello-dart/
    paging: Intro
  - text: "Background Infos"
    link: /library/hello-dart/background/
    icon-css: fa fa-fw fa-info
    paging: <i class="fa fa-info"></i>
  - text: "Installation"
    link: /library/hello-dart/install/
    icon-css: fa fa-fw fa-cog
    paging: <i class="fa fa-cog"></i>
  - text: "Part 1: First Steps"
    link: /library/hello-dart/part1/
    paging: 1
  - text: "Part 2: Loops"
    link: /library/hello-dart/part2/
    paging: 2
  - text: "Part 3: Conditionals"
    link: /library/hello-dart/part3/
    paging: 3
  - text: "Part 4: Variables"
    link: /library/hello-dart/part4/
    paging: 4
  - text: "Part 5: Functions"
    link: /library/hello-dart/part5/
    paging: 5
  - text: "Next Steps"
    link: /library/hello-dart/next/
    icon-css: fa fa-fw fa-flag-checkered
    paging: <i class="fa fa-flag-checkered"></i>
    active: true
languages:
  header: Languages
  collection: library
  item: hello-dart
  part: next
  active: en
---


Herzliche Gratulation, Sie haben das Ende dieser Serie erreicht! Hier erfahren Sie, wie es weiter gehen könnte.


### Dart Kanban - Die bessere Todo-Liste

<a href="/library/dart-kanban/de/" class="btn btn-warning"><i class="fa fa-hand-o-right"></i> Dart Kanban - Die bessere Todo-Liste</a>

Lernen Sie eine interaktive Webapplikation zu erstellen. Wir programmieren ein interaktives Kanban Board. 


### Mehr kommt bald...

Bald werden weitere Anleitungen zur Programmierung veröffentlicht. Wenn Sie informiert werden möchten, schreiben Sie sich für den [Newsletter](https://tinyletter.com/codemakery) ein.


### Feedback

Ich freue mich von Ihnen zu hören. Schreiben Sie einen Kommentar, wenn Sie die Serie glücklich beendet haben oder auch, wenn Sie Verbesserungsvorschläge haben. <a href="#disqus_thread"><i class="fa fa-comment-o"></i></a>

<i class="fa fa-beer"></i> Marco

Commit message:

Finishing the English translation of Hello Dart

collections/library/hello-dart-en-next.md, after:

---
layout: article
title: "Hello Dart - Next Steps"
date: 2015-05-01 00:00
slug: hello-dart/next
github: https://github.com/marcojakob/code.makery.ch/edit/master/collections/library/hello-dart-en-next.md
description: "How can you learn even more about web programming after you've completed the Hello Dart tutorial."
image: /assets/library/hello-dart/hello-dart.png
published: true
prettify: false
comments: true
sidebars:
- header: Articles in this Series
  body:
  - text: "Introduction"
    link: /library/hello-dart/
    paging: Intro
  - text: "Installation"
    link: /library/hello-dart/install/
    icon-css: fa fa-fw fa-cog
    paging: <i class="fa fa-cog"></i>
  - text: "Part 1: First Steps"
    link: /library/hello-dart/part1/
    paging: 1
  - text: "Part 2: Loops"
    link: /library/hello-dart/part2/
    paging: 2
  - text: "Part 3: Conditionals"
    link: /library/hello-dart/part3/
    paging: 3
  - text: "Part 4: Variables"
    link: /library/hello-dart/part4/
    paging: 4
  - text: "Part 5: Functions"
    link: /library/hello-dart/part5/
    paging: 5
  - text: "Next Steps"
    link: /library/hello-dart/next/
    icon-css: fa fa-fw fa-flag-checkered
    paging: <i class="fa fa-flag-checkered"></i>
    active: true
languages:
  header: Languages
  collection: library
  item: hello-dart
  part: next
  active: en
---


Congratulations, you've reached the end of this series! Here are some options of how you could continue with your programming adventure.


### Dart Kanban - A better Todo List

*currently in German only*

Learn to create an interactive web application. We will program an interactive Kanban board.

<a href="/library/dart-kanban/de/" class="btn btn-warning"><i class="fa fa-hand-o-right"></i> Dart Kanban - A better Todo List</a>


### More coming soon...

I plan to translate the *Dart Kanban* tutorial to English and publish more programming tutorials soon. If you want to get informed when they are released, register for the [newsletter](https://tinyletter.com/codemakery).


### Feedback

I would love to hear from you. Write a comment if you've successfully completed the tutorial and also if you have any suggestions about how the tutorial could be improved. <a href="#disqus_thread"><i class="fa fa-comment-o"></i></a>

<i class="fa fa-beer"></i> Marco
